[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: In July of
1947, the Army Air Force
reported a crash at Roswell,
New Mexico, of what they said
was a flying disk.
Then the next day,
that story changed.
And it changed the
lives of a number
of people who investigate UFOs.
One of them, Nick Redfern.
Nick, of course, is a
nationally-known ufologist,
and has been investigating UFOs
for, Nick, how many years now?
>>NICK REDFERN: Probably
30 years, thereabouts.
>>NOORY: How did you
get started in this.
>>REDFERN: Well, I'm one of
those people who actually
hasn't had a UFO encounter.
But my father was in the
British Royal Air Force.
He worked as a radar mechanic.
And in the early 1950s, he
was involved in several UFO
incidents off the
east coast of England,
where the radar
personnel were tracking
these strange, high-flying
objects performing
all sorts of weird maneuvers.
And fighter planes were
sent up from a nearby base
to try to intercept them.
And some of the pilots
described seeing
classic 1950s-style
flying saucers.
Others described seeing
these very bright lights.
And this went on over the
course of three days and nights.
And suddenly, this wave
of encounters was over.
And my dad, the ground
personnel, the radar operators,
the radar mechanics, the
pilots, everybody was told,
you won't talk about this.
And my father didn't mention
it until I was about 11 or 12,
when he told me the story.
And that's really what got
me interested in the subject,
yeah.
>>NOORY: Your work, The Roswell
UFO Conspiracy, is dramatic.
And before we get into that,
let's go back a little bit
to July of 1947, where the
story changed a number of times,
didn't it?
>>REDFERN: That's right.
What began in early
July 1947 was a report
of the crash and
recovery of a flying
disk in Roswell, New Mexico,
actually in Lincoln County,
on a ranch that was run
by a guy named Mac Brazel.
Now, if you think about it,
saying we've recovered a flying
disk is pretty sensational.
>>NOORY: It sure is.
>>REDFERN: It certainly is.
But then, the very next day,
that was actually changed.
It was just a weather balloon.
Sorry, guys.
Nothing to see.
And that really was the end
of the story until 1993.
And what happened in '93
was that the congressman
of New Mexico at the
time, Steven Schiff,
pushed for the Air
Force and the government
to open its files on
Roswell if any existed.
And what essentially happened
was that the General Accounting
Office, as it was
known at the time,
began investigating
the Roswell case
and asked various
government agencies
to see if they had any records.
They came up blank.
There was literally nothing
at all, apart from one
or two scraps of paper.
And the Air Force decided to
launch its own investigation.
And they concluded
that what came down
wasn't a weather balloon after
all, but a very large Mogul
balloon array.
Now, Mogul balloons
were used primarily
to spy on the Soviet Union and
to detect atomic bomb tests.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>REDFERN: And that
was why the program
was considered classified.
Because it was a highly
classified program.
Now at that particular
time, the Air Force
said we haven't really
touched on the issue
of the bodies in this report,
because mogul balloons didn't
have crews.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>REDFERN: So that was
the end of that story.
But it wasn't quite
the end after all.
In 1997, the Air Force
released another report saying,
well, yes there were
actually bodies at Roswell.
But they weren't human bodies.
They weren't animals.
They were crash test dummies
used in high altitude parachute
experiments.
>>NOORY: Dummies that we
would see, for example,
at atomic testing sites,
where they would have
the mother, the father, and the
two kids in this wooden house
that they blew up.
And they wanted to see
what would happen to them.
>>REDFERN: That's
exactly the situation.
Now, it was pointed
out to the Air Force
that the crash test dummy
experiments didn't really
begin until the early 1950s.
And the official
response was this
was due to time compression.
In other words, people were
mistaking 1947 for 1952 or '53.
>>NOORY: How could that be?
>>REDFERN: Well, that's
the big question?
So in other words, from
the government itself,
we have four
answers for Roswell.
We have the flying disk,
the weather balloon,
the mogul balloon, and
the crash test dummies.
So it's no wonder
that people, even
in the media, the
mainstream media,
wonder what really happened.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Were confused.
Were surprised.
And then we have stories
of they took wreckage
to Wright-Patterson.
Why would you do that if it
was just a simple balloon?
>>REDFERN: Well that's right.
There's no doubt
that if you just
recovered a mogul balloon
or a weather balloon,
then there really
would be no need
to take them to
Wright-Patterson,
which was the headquarters
of the Foreign Technology
Division.
Now, the Foreign Technology
Division essentially
looked at foreign technology.
>>NOORY: Sure
>>REDFERN: The Russians.
And today, the Chinese
and North Koreans.
You know, if we got our hands
on a missile or a bit of a space
satellite, we would
be able to analyze it.
So, in other words, whatever
came down at Roswell,
domestic, extraterrestrial,
then Wright-Patterson
would have been the ideal
place to take it to.
>>NOORY: Your new book, "The
Roswell UFO Conspiracy,"
deals with something
very similar,
but has a dramatic twist to it.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Tell us about that.
>>REDFERN: Well, yeah.
I mean, there are a
number of theories,
as I said, in
relation to what did
or didn't happen at Roswell.
One particular story that
I've been investigating
since the early 2000s suggests
a theory that, in many ways,
is more dark and more
dangerous and more
controversial, sinister, than
the idea that aliens crashed.
And it focuses on the idea
of human experimentation.
Essentially, human guinea pigs
used in high altitude flights
over New Mexico that encompassed
gigantic balloon arrays
and lifting body-type aircraft.
Essentially, it
was part and parcel
of a program to determine how
the human body would react
to high altitude exposure.
Now, this was something that was
fairly not that well-known back
in the 1940s.
And we know that
experiments were
done on chimpanzees, on
monkeys, rats, mice, even pigs.
But the story that I started
to uncover in the early 2000s
suggested this far more
controversial angle
of using human test
subjects, and in many cases
against their will.
And it seems that
there were actually
a number of these
experiments undertaken
in '47 throughout New Mexico
that, according to the people
I spoke to, suggested that these
accounts of these incidents
that went wrong and crashed
were responsible for the legends
of dead aliens and
crashed flying saucers.
>>NOORY: Nick, who were
the subjects that were
used in these balloon tests?
>>REDFERN: Well, to answer
that question, George,
we really have to go back to
the end of the Second World War.
We assumed, quite
correctly, that the Russians
were going to be the next
big problem, potentially.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Well, they were.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
And so what happened was
that, when the war ended,
we grabbed a lot of
the German scientists
and brought them over
to the US under what's
called Operation Paperclip.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>REDFERN: And
essentially, you had
a lot of Nazi scientists brought
over working on V-2 rockets,
and also a lot more
sophisticated rockets as well.
>>NOORY: Wernher von
Braun being one of them.
>>REDFERN: Exactly.
>>NOORY: Who, without
him, we may have never
had the space program
that we ended up having.
>>REDFERN: That's right.
And on top of that, there
was a lesser-known Japanese
counterpart to Operation
Paperclip where,
at the end of the Second
World War, the Japanese,
had Hiroshima and
Nagasaki not happened,
they were planning on building
these vast balloons that
would fly across the Pacific.
Essentially, sort of
a kamikaze mission.
They would actually
be crewed balloons.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And they
would crash them?
>>REDFERN: Yes, they
would direct them
into cities, things like that.
>>NOORY: Huh.
>>REDFERN: Now, there
was a precedent for this.
During in the Second
World War, the Japanese
had these balloons
called Fu-Go balloons.
And they were essentially
balloon bombs.
They didn't have crews.
They were very small.
But they were calibrated to
travel across the Pacific,
and they would get lower and
lower as they reached the US.
And these bombs would explode.
And fortunately, there was
only one case where there were
casualties and the people died.
For the most, part the
bombs didn't explode.
Or if they did, it was
in a remote location.
>>NOORY: Well, the Japanese
did have an experimental unit
during World War II, Nick.
>> Unit 731 was a covert
biological and chemical warfare
research and development unit
of the Japanese military that
engaged in lethal
human experimentation.
Established in 1935,
it served as the center
of Japan's biological warfare
in China and Southeast Asia
during World War II.
The museum was once the main
building used by Unit 731,
located in the Pingfang
district of suburban Harbin.
In August 1945, when
the Soviet Union
entered Northeast
China and freed Harbin,
the unit had to abandon
their facilities in haste.
The retreating
Japanese troops blew up
the compound to destroy
evidence of their activities.
>>NOORY: Well, Nick, did this
experimental unit have anything
to do with your theory.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, it
actually does, George.
In conjunction with
these balloon testings
and these radical new balloons
that were being developed,
one of the ideas
that the Japanese had
was to load these huge balloons
with biological warfare
agents, which would be
even worse than sort
of kamikaze missions.
If, God forbid,
you had some sort
of biological agent released
across the United States.
Now, fortunately, that
didn't happen, obviously.
But what did happen
was that, as well as
getting all the technology
over to the United States
from Japan in relation
to these balloons,
a lot of the files
and records, and some
of the scientists and personnel
that were working for Unit 731,
were also all brought
over to the United States.
Now, a lot of the records
have been declassified,
and you can read them at the
National Archives in Maryland.
There's thousands of pages
on the Japanese program
and the material brought over.
>>NOORY: Nick, how long
would it take a balloon
to float from Japan to the West
Coast of the United States?
>>REDFERN: Oh, it would
actually take quite a while.
And--
>>NOORY: Days?
Weeks?
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
We're talking days, yeah.
But one of the
interesting things
is that, certainly with the
balloon bombs in the Second
World War, it's more like a
psychological weapon than one
that actually could cause
a great amount of danger
or damage.
But certainly, these
bigger balloons,
that was a different story.
Now, we know for sure that the
plans that the Japanese had
for these big balloons were--
The records were found in Japan,
were brought over so we could,
in the same way we're working
with the German scientists,
we could increase our
technology by looking
at these Japanese
balloons as well.
And the story that
I was given was
that a number of
these large balloons
were tested over New Mexico
with these lifting body-type
aircraft beneath them,
which could be detached.
And in a war situation, that
would be the kamikaze weapon.
Or it would you be
able to drop bombs.
>>NOORY: Right
>>REDFERN: But in terms of the
Roswell case, what I was told
was that there was some
sort of mid-air accident.
And the craft detached
from the balloon array.
The balloon exploded,
and the balloon wreckage,
or the debris, showered
down on the ranch,
almost like a huge
snowfall, so to speak.
But then, the craft
itself, being much heavier,
just plummeted down vertically.
So we had two different
crash sites on the ranch.
One where the craft came down.
And then you had this
huge field of debris.
>>NOORY: And there were several
crash sites, were there not?
>>REDFERN: Well, that's
the interesting thing.
It wasn't just one
location on the ranch.
We know for sure that
the debris area that
was found by the rancher Mac
Brazel, where there was all
this strange foil strewn
about the ranch itself,
that was the primary site.
But there were rumors that,
as Brazel was searching
around the ranch to
try and figure out
what was happening, that he
found another site where there
were several bodies.
Now, whether you take
the view that they
were Japanese or alien,
pretty much everybody
that has looked
into this case has
suggested those was this second
site where a number of bodies
were found, partly decayed due
to the rigors of the weather
in the summer in New Mexico.
And there was also
potentially a third site
where the craft came down,
whether intact or partially
damaged.
And so there are at least two
sites, potentially three sites.
>>NOORY: You're a ufologist.
You investigate UFO stories.
You're not a debunker.
>>REDFERN: No.
>>NOORY: You're not a skeptic.
You just want to
get to the truth.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Most
ufologists, when they
hear this theory of the
balloons and small Japanese
coming over and testing this,
would probably say, "No.
This was a UFO.
We want it to be a UFO crash."
There seems to be a hunger
in the field of ufology
to make this case,
Roswell, New Mexico,
an extraterrestrial case.
>>REDFERN: Well, there's
no doubt about that.
I mean there are some
researches, like Stan Friedman,
Stan legitimately concludes that
aliens did crash at Roswell.
But there are other
researchers who
I think are more belief-driven.
That kind of X-Files "I
want to believe" factor.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>REDFERN: And I think
what has happened
over the years is that
Roswell has been elevated
to ufology's sacred cow.
It's the number one case--
>>NOORY: It is that.
>>REDFERN: --in ufology.
>>NOORY: And if you
blow that bubble,
you may blow the
bubble on everything.
>>REDFERN: Well,
that's the thing.
And I think it's
always dangerous
if you elevate something
to the number one events.
Because it's like the old adage.
The larger they are,
the harder they fall.
And I think if
Roswell was proved
to not have been
extraterrestrial,
but to have been something
more controversial,
but down-to-earth,
I think it would
create a lot of
disillusionment in ufology.
People would feel, is it
worth keep investigating--
>>NOORY: Any of them.
>>REDFERN: --if the best case
is not the best case after all?
But from my perspective, you're
right, I'm not a debunker.
What happened was that,
beginning in 2001,
I got these stories from
a number of old-timers
in the military, the
intelligence community, etc,
who told me the story.
And I think it's
the only one that's
viable, that makes common
sense, if it wasn't aliens.
>>NOORY: Well, and see,
what has always bothered me,
Nick, over the years, as I've
looked at the Roswell case,
was the fact that if it was
an extraterrestrial craft that
probably came from, let's say,
a mother ship hovering around
our planet, the
point is it crashed.
And how could
something that traveled
so many millions of miles
to get to our planet
then simply crash?
And I am I always had
a difficult time trying
to understand that.
>>REDFERN: Well, yeah.
I mean, that's a good point.
And on that same
track, George, if you
look at some of the
genuinely weird UFO cases,
we have accounts of aliens
kidnapping aircraft, kidnapping
pilots, walking through walls.
Which makes me wonder,
why didn't they
just collect the wreckage?
And then nobody would
have known about it.
>>NOORY: And go.
>>REDFERN: And go.
I mean, if I can clearly kidnap
planes in the sky and pilots,
then why not actually
just hover over the ranch,
collect the materials,
or just obliterate it?
And then nobody would
be any the wiser at all.
>>NOORY: There was another
Japanese operation during World
War II called Project Fu-Go.
>> Supposedly, the whole
city of Denver saw it.
But nobody knew what
they were seeing.
>> The balloon bomb attack
against North America was
a real threat.
>> People didn't
know what it was.
A very strange device
>> It was actually happening.
It was a matter of what
is the magnitude that this
is going to develop into.
>> There was a clampdown
of release of information.
>> The media needed
to be subdued.
>> Papers did sit on the
biggest stories that happened
in their region.
"Do not talk about this."
They did not want any news
going back to the Japanese.
>> A unique Japanese offensive
weapon of an unknown magnitude
was lifting into the skies.
>> It was quite a feat to
make such a mechanical device.
>> Understanding the complex
jet streams would be the key
to Japan's balloon
bomb offensive.
>>NOORY: I got to
tell you, Nick.
That there is an
incredible story.
My gosh.
And how many
balloons do you think
they would have launched
at us at any given time?
>>REDFERN: Well reportedly,
they launched thousands.
But not all of them
reached the United States.
But it was a really
inventive weapon.
And it was a dangerous weapon.
Because on a number
of occasions,
people found these things
and wondered what they were,
this strange balloon debris.
>>NOORY: So others landed
in the United States?
>>REDFERN: Yes, there was
actually, fortunately,
just one case of fatalities.
It was actually a family
that was picnicking
and they came across
this wreckage.
And the bomb was still
primed and several of them
had been killed.
>>NOORY: It blew up on them?
>>REDFERN: It blew up
on them and killed them.
But that was the only example
of where deaths occurred.
But well into the 1960s,
in sort of remote forests,
people were still finding them.
And it sort of tells
a fascinating story
of these not
highly-advanced balloons,
but the way they were calibrated
to travel across the jet stream
from Japan to the United States.
And it would get lower
and lower in the sky,
and calibrated to
come down over the US.
And as I said, in
one sense, they
were like a
psychological weapon.
Propaganda designed
to frighten people.
But the fact that the Japanese
had developed these balloons
and were going on to develop
these even more larger
and sophisticated
ones, which would have
these aircraft attached beneath
them, that could be detached
and used like a kamikaze
device or to bomb cities,
we realized that, well, we
could use this technology
from our perspective as well.
Perhaps to launch aircraft
high into the sky,
and then have them detach.
And it really was an example
of using this technology
as a means to not
so much develop
the start of the space program,
but the pre-space program,
so to speak.
>>NOORY: Did every balloon
have Japanese occupants?
>>REDFERN: No.
This is where it
gets controversial.
And there is some
support for this.
The stories that I was told
was that, in some cases,
the people were Japanese.
And it was a case of they
were brought over from Japan.
And it was the kind of
offer you can't refuse.
You work for us--
>>NOORY: It was a one
way trip though, right?
>>REDFERN: Well, no.
It actually wasn't meant
to be a one-way trip, no.
>>NOORY: How would
they get back?
>>REDFERN: Well, if they
had a lifting craft, then
they could actually
glide that back down
to where the craft
took off from.
>>NOORY: Just drop it
and go back up again?
>>REDFERN: Well, yes.
But, no, it would
have to be reattached.
It was just, each one
would be a one-time event.
But in some of the cases, it was
reportedly the Japanese crews.
Now, in some of these
other experiments,
where there were just
high-altitude balloons,
and testing and understanding
high altitude exposure,
the story I got
was they actually
took a number of
people, like prisoners.
>>NOORY: Japanese prisoners?
>>REDFERN: No.
American prisoners.
And gave them deals
in the United States.
If you take part in
these experiments,
we will knock three
years off your sentence,
that kind of thing.
And incredibly, those files
have surfaced in relation
to what was called a
nuclear aircraft program.
And essentially,
in the late '40s,
there were plans to build
nuclear-powered aircraft.
And the declassified files
through the Freedom Information
Act actually do
talk about the idea
of approaching prisons and
seeing if prisoners wanted
a shorter sentence, but
you've got to take part
in this experiment.
Now, it gets really
controversial,
because some of the
people reportedly used
as guinea pigs in these
high-altitude balloon flights
were people taken
from, like, asylums.
Basically, handicapped people.
>>NOORY: They just
wanted bodies up there.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
They wanted people
who were alive.
Who could be brought
back, hopefully alive.
And we would be able to
determine how they physically
had been affected,
or not affected,
by high-altitude exposure by
cosmic rays, by radiation.
And if that's
true, that may well
explain why there was so
much secrecy and so much
of a cover up to hide the fact
that human guinea pigs may
have actually been used.
The craft came down, crashed.
The bodies of the people
were strewn around and--
>>NOORY: They looked alien.
>>REDFERN: Yep.
Well, that's the other thing.
That some of the
people were reportedly
physically handicapped.
And they change chose
physically handicapped people
because that's what they wanted.
But it was easy to get people
who wouldn't be missed,
who were in asylums.
>>NOORY: Maybe they didn't have
family, or something like that.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, because
back then, in the '40s,
there was certainly more
stigma about physical handicaps
and psychological handicaps.
>>NOORY: Nick, the
Japanese theory,
the timeline doesn't make sense.
Because the war ended in 1945.
Roswell occurred in 1947.
It wouldn't have taken
two years for that balloon
to come over here.
How do you explain
that time gap?
>>REDFERN: Oh, well,
what it actually
was, when the war
ended and we brought
all the files and the personnel
and the balloon data, etc,
and the Unit 731 people, we
brought all that over in '45.
And it was being
secretly research,
and these balloons are being
constructed within the United
States over the
course of '45, '46.
And the testing reportedly
began in early '47.
So it wasn't like a secret
unit of the Japanese
that was still fighting
the war in '47.
It was like with the
Paperclip program.
That in the same way that
the rockets were brought over
and the scientists
were brought over
from Germany, the Japanese
scientists and technology
were brought over from Japan.
So it was a case of--
>>NOORY: So you're saying that
the balloon that was launched
did not come from Japan?
>>REDFERN: No, it was
based on Japanese designs
but constructed in the U.S.
>>NOORY: Aha!
That's a big difference.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: How was it
kept secret for so long?
>>REDFERN: Well, in the
same way that Paperclip
was hidden for so long.
That "loose lips sink ships."
It was essentially a case of
burying these programs, not
so much because
of the technology,
but because it revolved
around doing deals with people
who we'd just been fighting
for the last close to a decade
almost.
And so, in other words,
it wasn't so much
that there was anything
particularly secret
about the balloons.
There wasn't anything
particularly secret
about the German rockets.
The secret was we did deals
with the Nazi scientists
and we did deals with
the Unit 731 people.
Those were the big secrets
that had to be hidden.
>>NOORY: Interesting take.
We have a little video clip of
the 1947 episode in Roswell.
It's a great
incident, of course.
[MORSE CODE BEEPING]
>> Headline edition,
July 8th, 1947.
The Army Air Force has
announced that a flying
disk has been found, and is now
in the possession of the Army.
Army officers say the missile,
found some time last week,
has been inspected at
Roswell, New Mexico,
and sent to Wright Field in
Ohio for further inspection.
>>NOORY: That was
actually broadcast
by the newscaster who was
given that information
by the military.
>>REDFERN: That's right.
>>NOORY: And then the next
day, they recanted that story.
>>REDFERN: Mm-hm
Well, you know, that's
an interesting you know piece
of audio, the main reason being,
because you're quite
right, that they
announced it was a flying disk.
And I asked the people
I interviewed, well,
how do you reconcile that?
If the military knew
that it was really
a secret device
of theirs, why say
it was a flying disk at all?
That doesn't make sense.
And the answer I got
was that the guys who
flew the device and
the guys at Roswell
were two distinct entities.
>>NOORY: Not one wasn't knowing
what the other was doing?
>>REDFERN: Yeah, exactly.
Most of the people
I interviewed said
that the vast majority
of these balloon launches
were initiated from White
Sands, from what is today
the White Sands Missile Range.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Not too far from Roswell.
>>REDFERN: Not too far, no.
And some from Alamogordo.
But the programs were so
tightly hidden that need to know
was the order of the day.
And so the guys
working at Roswell
didn't know anything
about this program.
So when the rancher Mac
Brazel found this wreckage,
and it was reportedly
a night flight.
And the reason they
had night flights
was because these vast
balloons, in the summer,
they were so large
and they would
get so high that
they could explode
because of the daytime heat.
So they would have
nighttime flights.
They weren't anticipating this
thing exploding and crashing,
which is what happened.
And so with it being
a nighttime flight,
they weren't sure
where it had come down.
And so you had the
rancher, in a worst case
scenario for the military,
getting there before they did.
Then the rancher tells
the local police.
He contacts the guys at Roswell.
They come out.
They don't know
anything about it.
Then they announce,
well, could it
be one of those flying saucers
everybody's talking about?
Then the guys that launched it
from the other installations,
they're like, oh, no.
They've just found--
>>NOORY: They found it.
>>REDFERN: What we've just been
looking for the last 24 hours.
And the cat's got
out of the bag.
Because one group has
released the information,
not knowing it's actually
a domestic program
of another arm of the military.
>>NOORY: Gosh, if they only
have social networking,
they would have known
everything instantly.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
And that does happen.
Agency A doesn't know
what Agency B is doing.
And it really was just
due to those circumstances
of the unpredictability
and the unforeseen issue
of the balloon exploding,
and the craft coming down
and the balloon
debris coming down,
with it being a
nighttime flight, which
made it more difficult for
them to find the wreckage.
If you think about it, a
30-foot type size craft
and just a field
of balloon debris
would be fairly hard
to find at night.
And of course, you've got
the other unforeseen angle
of the rancher getting there
before the military found it.
And--
>>NOORY: Puzzled and baffled.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
Quickly contacting
the police, who
quickly contact the guys at
Roswell, who quickly come out
to the scene.
And they're there
before anybody else.
Now, we know that
Major Jesse Marcel
went to the debris
field, which could well
have been this huge
field of balloon debris.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>REDFERN: But two other
guys, Sheridan Cavitt
and Bill Rickett, who we
also know were on the ranch,
very quickly, who were
also based at Roswell,
there's good evidence
that they actually
stumbled on the body site.
Or Brazel took them
to the body site,
where Marcel went back to
the base with the wreckage.
>>NOORY: The late Jesse Marcel,
Jr., the son of Jesse Marcel,
who was a military doctor
in Iraq, and I've known him,
you knew him, said that
his father showed him
something from
the wreckage which
looked like Egyptian
hieroglyphs,
or something like that.
Might they have been Japanese?
>>REDFERN: Well, that's
actually what I was told.
That because they brought
the Japanese personnel,
the scientists, and
even the crews that
would build these balloons,
and show them the designs
that they got, it was kind of
like in the Second World War
when we would bomb Germany.
The guys in the crews, on
the aircraft and the bombers,
they would sometimes
write little messages
and say "Hey,
Adolf" on the bombs.
Just kind of a morale
increasing thing.
And then they would
drop the bombs.
>>NOORY: Well, we knew
what our troops used to do,
painting their planes
with all kinds of things.
>>REDFERN: Exactly.
Yeah.
I was told it was
something akin to that.
That they would leave
their trademark messages
on these balloons.
We weren't at war then, but
they put their names on there.
Or they may just put a
message, something like that.
And I was told that it was
Japanese writing, which
maybe a lot of people in
the 1940s would not know.
>>NOORY: I did not
know about your theory
by the time I was interviewing
Jesse Marcel, Jr.,
or I would have asked him that.
If it was possible that
what he saw was Japanese.
Because if you look
at Japanese writing,
it would look like something
very out of this world.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, so that's--
>>NOORY: That makes sense.
>>REDFERN: It does.
And what convinces
me that this could
be the answer is that if it was
just fed to me and to nobody
else, then I would
have been suspicious
that, well, there's only one
person being given this story.
But if we look into it, the
late Leonard Stringfield,
a UFO researcher who--
>>NOORY: A good one.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, he was.
And he extensively investigated
crashed UFO stories.
He was actually given the
Japanese angle in 1990,
and briefly published
it in a report in 1991,
where he was told that a lot
of these Japanese people,
some of them handicapped,
were brought over and taken
to Los Alamos, where
investigations and tests were
done on them.
Different ones, though, but in
relation to radiation exposure.
Now, of course, Los Alamos
is in New Mexico as well.
Now, Stringfield
published that in '91.
In 1997, the well-respected
magazine Popular Mechanics,
they published an article
saying they'd actually
been told of a forthcoming
release of files, which
would tell of a Japanese
equivalence of Paperclip,
and that the files
were going surface.
Now, the files didn't surface.
What did surface in '97 instead
was the crash test dummy angle.
But Popular Mechanics
did go on the record
as stating that
someone on the inside
had said this is
going to come out.
And then in 2004, a
well-respected Australian
researcher, Keith
Baskerfield, Keith
was given the same story,
almost identical to that
which I'd been given.
But I hadn't published
anything on them.
And that was almost
literally identical,
even down to the nighttime
flight and the rancher
getting the story out
before the military
was able to get there first.
And so when you put all
those different strands
from around the world together,
that is, for me at least,
a pointer that I'm in
the right direction.
>>NOORY: Nick, most of
the people associated
with the original Roswell
episode in 1947 are dead.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
>>NOORY: The mortician is dead.
Eyewitnesses are dead.
Pilots are dead.
Are we ever going to get
to the bottom of this?
>>REDFERN: Well, that's
the big question.
I mean, the big
irony, of course,
is that, in all the theories
that have been put forward,
one of them probably is,
we do have the answer.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>REDFERN: So the big problem
is we can't prove the answer.
And testimony's great.
Documentation.
To a degree that we've
got it, is great.
But a lot of it is just,
like, the MJ-12 documents,
which people have questions
because they're leaked,
rather than
officially-released documents.
So the big problem
is, how do we get
past this stumbling
block of we've
got this, we've
got the testimony,
but where do we now take it?
There are two or
three possibilities.
Either the government
comes clean
or an agency comes
clean because it
wants that data to get
out, versus somebody else
who doesn't want it to get out.
I think there
could have actually
been a silent battle
behind the scenes
whether or not they
should be released.
Now, another theory,
which isn't impossible,
given that we're all flawed, it
could it surface by accident.
That something gets declassified
or released by mistake.
And it could just be a
paragraph in a totally otherwise
innocuous document, but
references something that
happened.
And then, just by
the circumstances,
it provokes further
doors to open.
>>NOORY: Have there been
any government documents
that have been released
by whistleblowers
or by the Freedom of
Information Act that
would point that something very
unusual happened at Roswell.
>>REDFERN: There
actually is one, really.
And it's become known
as the Ramey Memo.
Now, what happened in '47, after
Jesse Marcel found the debris,
he was flown up to Fort Worth.
And you have this
famous situation,
or infamous situation, where
you had the press there taking
photographs.
>>NOORY: And I
remember that picture
of him kneeling down
with all this stuff
put all over the place.
>>REDFERN: That's right.
And one of the people who was
there was General Roger Ramey.
Ramey actually had a piece
of paper in his hand.
And with today's
technology, we've
been able to blow it up and
try and decipher and deblur
what it actually says.
And it actually does look in
one part as if it refers to,
quote, "the victims
of the wreck."
And if that's the
case, then we're
clearly not talking
about a weather balloon.
We're not talking
about a Mogul balloon.
And nobody of a
sound mind is going
to call a crash
test dummy a victim.
So that is a pointer either
towards human casualties
or alien casualties.
My view is that,
if it was aliens,
I think they would
have used terms
like "the aliens,"
"the spacemen".
>>NOORY: The occupants
>>REDFERN: The occupants.
To me, "victims"
sounds more of an--
>>NOORY: Human.
>>REDFERN: --emotional,
human angle to it.
That's about the only
thing that surfaced.
The other theory that
some people have suggested
is that, one day, there
might be something
like a ufological
Edward Snowden.
That kind of thing.
>>NOORY: I would hope so.
>>REDFERN: The problem
is that whatever
happened is buried so deeply,
literally perhaps so deeply
in an underground bunker,
which is guarded 24/7,
there's just no way to get it.
So we are at that stage where
it's becoming like a UFO
equivalent of Jack the Ripper.
An old mystery which
everybody knows about.
Different theories.
Lots of witnesses back then.
But now they're all gone.
Where do we take it from here?
I think we just need to
keep digging and digging--
>>NOORY: Sure.
You can't stop.
>>REDFERN: --and digging.
That's all you can do.
>>NOORY: Well,
Roswell, New Mexico
is right in the middle
of military bases
and applications.
>> It began in
Roswell, New Mexico.
Near White Sands and
Alamogordo, Roswell
was home base for many
early tests of atom bombs
and guided missiles.
Here also, the practice
of military stonewalling
may have been perpetrated.
>>NOORY: I don't know, Nick.
The romantic part
of me would love
to think that this
was a crashed UFO.
>>REDFERN: Well,
ironically, so would
I. Because it would
legitimize everything
we've ever said and done.
But I have to be
honest with myself
and honest with my
readers or listeners.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>REDFERN: But I put this
story out not to debunk
or not to destroy belief
systems or cause ufology
to come crashing down.
I put the story
out because I think
it is a legitimately common
sense-filled explanation
for a very controversial event.
And I think it's the
only one that is valid,
if the ufological one is not.
But I feel the responsibility's
on my part to put this out,
because I think it does
answer a lot of the questions
as to what happened.
Now, we saw how packed
in the 1940s were--
New Mexico was in the 1940s.
We had Los Alamos, where the
atomic bomb was developed,
or a lot of the research.
We had White Sands, where a
lot of the Paperclip scientists
were based.
Alamogordo, where, again, a
lot of the German scientists.
And of course, one of
the more intriguing ones,
that the Roswell Army
Air Force Base itself
was home to the 509th Wing.
The 509th were the guys who
dropped the atomic bombs
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
So you had multiple
installations and facilities
in New Mexico, which were really
at the forefront of military
and government secrecy.
And then suddenly,
on the ranch, you
have this weird
contraption come down.
>>NOORY: Nick, we are at the
70th anniversary of the Roswell
crash.
70 years.
And still, we don't have
the definitive answer.
Do you think we ever will?
>>REDFERN: Well,
I try and remain
optimistic in every
aspect of life.
But certainly Roswell, I am
optimistic that the answers
will surface.
I think the worst
thing we can do
is say, well, it's 70 years ago.
Everybody's dead.
We've got as much as we can.
And that's it.
And I think that would be a weak
and defeatist approach to take.
I think we just need
to keep pushing,
look down the alternative
pathways for what happened,
keep pushing through
Freedom of Information.
And who knows?
If we keep putting the word
out, maybe there's some 70,
80-year-old guy who
was involved back
then, who happened to take
40 or 50 pages with him
when he retired.
And when security may not
have been so stringent,
where everything wasn't online.
But you had actual paper files.
Maybe something one
day, if we keep pushing,
is going to surface.
I hope that happens.
And for me, I'll just keep
on trying to get the answers.
>>NOORY: Would Nick
Redfern, perhaps,
want it to be a crashed UFO?
>>REDFERN: Yes.
Yeah, that's the
biggest irony of all,
from my perspective,
of what I'm doing.
I would love it if proof
surfaced that extraterrestrials
crashed at Roswell.
And yes, it's proof
that there is life
elsewhere in the universe.
That would be a defining
moment in human history.
And I would be happy to admit,
but I would freely admit--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>REDFERN: --that I
was fed disinformation
to hide the UFO angle.
But there are so many
threads and so many leads.
And the timeframe and the
scientists being brought over
and the descriptions
of the bodies looking--
>>NOORY: It makes
too much sense.
>>REDFERN: --Japanese
and, quote,
"Oriental," as they
worded it back then.
For me, I don't think
I'm on the wrong track.
I think I'm on the right track.
But the next step is like--
With Stan, for example,
investigating the UFO angle,
both Stan and I are
looking for the same thing.
That's the undeniable
proof of what happened.
>>NOORY: What does
this tell you, though?
Because if the
mother of UFO cases
turns out to be earthbound,
right, this theory of
balloons and tests.
But if it turns out to
be that's the case, what
does that tell you about the
field of ufology in general
if the biggest case turns
out to be earthbound?
>>REDFERN: Yeah, if it turns
out not to be so big after all,
I think it's going to
cause us to look at ufology
from a different perspective.
For example, if Roswell,
the best crashed UFO case,
crumbles, then by default,
that's going to make us think,
well, are any of the other
crashed UFO stories real?
Or were they something
else like Kecksburg
or Aztec, could they have been--
>>NOORY: Rendlesham.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, Rendlesham.
Could they have
been secret devices?
Also, if there were no crashed
UFOs and no dead aliens
from Roswell, does that mean
that all these other stories
about dead aliens stored away in
cryogenic storage underground,
are they all false?
I sometimes wonder,
if that happens,
if ufology may move away from
sort of a definitive alien
nuts-and-bolts approach,
and perhaps go down the more
paranormal path that people like
John Keel and Jacques Valle
have spoken about.
>>NOORY: Dimensional
and things like that.
>>REDFERN: Dimensional, yeah.
But--
>>NOORY: I want to think of
it, though, as planetary.
That, in this vastness
of our universe
that's beyond the
multiverses, there
are other planets,
hundreds and thousands
of other planets
with human beings,
with occupants,
with inhabitants.
I want to believe that.
I don't want to believe that
we're alone in the universe.
>>REDFERN: I totally
agree with you.
And I cannot deny that.
But I do believe, still, there's
a genuine UFO phenomenon.
I mean, we mentioned earlier,
my father's experience.
The maneuvers and
the performances
that were going on in
the skies over England
then when he was
working on radar, nobody
was flying anything
like that back then.
And there have been
a really good case
from the '50s, the
'60s, the '70s.
>>NOORY: Oh my goodness, yeah.
There are too many
great cases out there.
The Lonnie Zamora.
>>REDFERN: Yep.
>>NOORY: The Socorro
New Mexico police
officer who saw a craft
land, saw occupants.
They got in and
went back up again.
>>REDFERN: Yeah.
So from my perspective,
I'm a full-on believer
in the UFO phenomenon.
I'm just not convinced that
an aspect to that phenomenon
came down at Roswell.
>>NOORY: I always
think back to when
I was a 21-year-old radio
reporter in Detroit, Michigan,
Nick.
And I had the opportunity
to interview Dr. Benjamin
Simon, who was the
psychiatrist of Barney
and Betty Hill, the first
major UFO abduction case, that
was released in the '60s.
Look Magazine did
a huge story on it.
John Fuller wrote a book
about The Interrupted Journey.
It was an amazing case.
And I interviewed Simon, and
I asked him specifically,
do you think that Barney and
Betty Hill were lying to you?
And he said, they
were not lying.
He said, "I hypnotized
them both separately.
Their stories were the same.
I don't know, George.
I don't know what they saw.
And I don't know what
happened to them.
"But whatever happened to
them, they believe it to be.
They're not lying.
They're telling
me the truth based
on their own perspective."
So I came away with
that interview,
Nick, believing that
here's a psychiatrist who
admits they're
telling the truth,
doesn't know what they saw
or what happened to them.
But clearly says whatever they
said, they believe it to be.
And that's an amazing story.
>>REDFERN: Yeah, and I would go
along with that with Roswell.
I mean, yes, of
these, there have
been a few fakers and people
who've inserted themselves
into the story.
And then the story's
just fallen apart.
But they're in the minority.
The people who recalled
seeing military
cordons keeping people
away from the crash site.
The military collecting
and scooping up
all of this material.
The stories of Sheridan
Cavitt and Bill Rickett
seeing the bodies.
Things like this, they're
not lying in the slightest.
The big question is,
what did they see?
Did they say relatively
small aliens?
Did they, in some cases,
see handicapped people
who, at a distance,
well they were small.
They may have looked slightly--
>>NOORY: Would they have been
mangled with a crash like that?
>>REDFERN: Yes, certainly,
they had been mangled.
And it was probably 24
hours after at least
before Brazel found the bodies.
>>NOORY: So they
were decomposing
and everything else.
>>REDFERN: Decomposition.
Who knows?
Wild animals.
>>NOORY: Animals.
>>REDFERN: And so I don't
think the vast majority are
lying at all.
From their perspective,
they're reporting exactly what
they conclude happened.
But by the same token,
the people I interviewed
were doing likewise,
but from the perspective
of human experiments.
>>NOORY: Dramatic.
>>REDFERN: Oh, it is.
Whatever the answer
is, Roswell is still
going to be an important
aspect of ufology.
If it's proven to be
extraterrestrial, great.
We've won, so to speak.
If it proves not to be
extraterrestrial, but something
similar to what I'm
talking about or identical,
it will still be an
important part of ufology.
But from the perspective
of learning a lesson
and understanding how belief
systems, facts, mythology,
anonymous witnesses, and
everything along those lines
comes together to create
the story of Roswell.
And I think it will make people
perhaps not jump to the gun
too quickly in other
sensational cases,
but look at them from a
slower pace, a steadier pace.
And not elevate
them to a position
where the big danger
is they could fall.
>>NOORY: Nick, what
does this tell you
about government cover-ups
and government secrecy?
>>REDFERN: Well, I think
the main thing it tells us
about government secrecy
is that, in many cases,
particularly like
Roswell, it's easy to hide
the physical remains of whatever
happened because we don't have
any of those.
Now, the story of
Roswell clearly
hasn't been hidden because
we're talking about it,
and dozens of books have
been written on the subject.
I think the problem is,
for us, for the most part,
particularly when it comes
to the mainstream media,
Roswell hasn't been believed.
It's believed by ufologists.
And in--
>>NOORY: And people.
A lot of people.
>>REDFERN: And a lot of
people in the public,
the general public, are
entertained and intrigued
by Roswell.
But the very fact that
this secret revolves
around something that
could involve aliens
from another world, the problem
is that the mainstream media
won't touch it.
So in other words,
what this demonstrates,
when you come back
to your question,
the more controversial
a secret is,
ironically, it's easier to keep.
Because the more
controversy, people just
say, well, that just
couldn't happen.
It's too out there.
So they walk away from
it, and they go what
is more acceptable to them.
>>NOORY: In your opinion will
we ever get the definitive proof
about Roswell?
>>REDFERN: I think we will.
But I don't think it's
going to come by disclosure.
I think it's going to come
through unforeseen ways.
Something surfaces by mistake.
An old guy who's got
a batch of material
that he kept when
he left the base,
it's sitting in his attic.
Or a ufological
Snowden comes along.
I think those are the
only potential ways
this could happen.
>>NOORY: Nick, thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>REDFERN: Thanks a lot, George.
>>NOORY: That's why we
call it Beyond Belief.
Beyond Belief is a program
that investigates the unknown,
such as the Roswell case.
Will we ever get to the bottom?
Will we ever find the truth?
Who knows?
But we will continue
to seek the truth.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching Beyond Belief.
[THEME MUSIC]